[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: We have tended to treat it less as a book and more as a periodical.
[Amit Varma]: And we respect the institution we regard as the guardian of that constitution, the Supreme
[Amit Varma]: Court.
[Amit Varma]: There might be many things wrong with our society and our culture, but we think of the
[Amit Varma]: Supreme Court as the one institution that can mitigate them.
[Amit Varma]: But what if, instead of mitigating the faults of society, the Supreme Court instead reflects
[Amit Varma]: them and even deepens them?
[Unknown]: What are we to do then?
[Amit Varma]: My topic for today is the Supreme Court of India and the specific trigger that sparked
[Amit Varma]: this episode was the disgraceful conduct of the court when it came to recent allegations
[Amit Varma]: of sexual harassment against the Chief Justice of India.
[Amit Varma]: My friend and frequent guest on the show, the economist Shruti Rajagopalan, who specializes
[Amit Varma]: in constitutional economics, wrote an angry article about it in The Wire, which is linked
[Amit Varma]: from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: I invited her back on the show to chat about this case in particular and the Supreme Court
[Amit Varma]: in general.
[Amit Varma]: But before we get to that conversation, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: This episode of the scene in the unseen is brought to you by Storytel.
[Amit Varma]: Storytel is an audiobook platform which you can listen to on your Android or iOS app.
[Amit Varma]: They have thousands of audiobooks that you can listen to on your mobile, including hundreds
[Amit Varma]: in local languages like Hindi and Marathi.
[Amit Varma]: An unlimited monthly subscription costs only Rs. 299 per month.
[Amit Varma]: And you can also get a 30-day free trial if you hop on over to Storytel.com slash IBM.
[Amit Varma]: I actually use Storytel myself regularly, so as long as they sponsor this show, I'm
[Amit Varma]: going to recommend one book a week that I love.
[Amit Varma]: The book I want to recommend today is Alice in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll.
[Amit Varma]: This is enough of the real world, just take a break from it, it's a classic, it's delightful
[Amit Varma]: and it makes you laugh every time.
[Amit Varma]: And remember, you get a 30-day free trial only at Storytel.com slash IBM.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti, welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Guest]: Hi, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: It's great to be here.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, when I read your wonderful piece in The Wire, the first thing that struck me
[Amit Varma]: was how angry you were.
[Amit Varma]: You described it as the death of justice in India.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit more about the case.
[Guest]: So there were a few things going on in this particular case that really distressed me.
[Guest]: So as we all know, there was a sexual harassment complaint by one of the staff members of the
[Guest]: Supreme Court of India who worked for the current Chief Justice, Justice Ranjan Gogoi.
[Guest]: And she sent an affidavit to the other 22 justices of the Supreme Court and requested
[Guest]: an inquiry into her complaint that she had been subject to sexual harassment and abuse.
[Guest]: Now it just so happens that the Supreme Court of India was the front runner when it came
[Guest]: to sexual harassment.
[Guest]: This is in a judgment called Vishakha v. State of Rajasthan, which was far back, like in
[Guest]: 1997 and well before there was any MeToo movement or even any serious recognition of the problem
[Guest]: of sexual harassment at the workplace by any other institution in the country, the Supreme
[Guest]: Court said, we need to recognize this problem.
[Guest]: There is a huge gap in the law.
[Guest]: In a very activist opinion, they actually did what we call now legislating from the
[Guest]: bench.
[Guest]: That is in the absence of law, they literally made law.
[Guest]: So the Supreme Court provided a series of guidelines on what needs to be done by every
[Guest]: single workplace in India to prevent sexual harassment and how to deal with the complaints.
[Guest]: And these guidelines were things like, there needs to be a committee, the committee should
[Guest]: have at least 50% women, it needs to meet certain criteria, there must be an external
[Guest]: member to the committee and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: And it is this internal committee where any sexual harassment complaint would be reported
[Guest]: and they would deal with it swiftly.
[Guest]: And they said that in the absence of any legislation, these guidelines would be law.
[Guest]: And then eventually, many years later, the parliament did pass legislation on sexual
[Guest]: harassment.
[Guest]: So one would think that given that the Supreme Court was the front runner on this, and they
[Guest]: are the ones who had actually come up with the guidelines.
[Guest]: And given the fact that these are all members trained in law, they serve in the highest
[Guest]: court of the country, that they would know what to do swiftly and justly.
[Guest]: And what happened immediately after was a series of horrific events.
[Guest]: So the first thing that happened was that the Secretary General of the Supreme Court,
[Guest]: before anything, like overnight, before any committee had been formed or anything else,
[Guest]: just said that these are mischievous and false accusations.
[Guest]: They're trying to malign the institution.
[Guest]: And it's like the opposition and other interfering forces are trying to reduce the stature of
[Guest]: the judiciary.
[Guest]: So first of all, it seems like there are other members of the staff who had already come
[Guest]: out in judgment immediately after the affidavit and the complaint had been sent, even before
[Guest]: anything else had been done.
[Guest]: And this is obviously extremely inappropriate for any institution, but for the Supreme Court,
[Guest]: it's really shocking.
[Guest]: Immediately after that, what happened is the Chief Justice of India constituted a bench
[Guest]: and in this particular bench to hear this matter, he sat on the bench himself along
[Guest]: with two other justices, Justice Khanna and Justice Arun Mishra, not Deepak Mishra.
[Guest]: So you can imagine that the most fundamental principle of natural justice, which is that
[Guest]: one shall not sit in judgment of one's own cause was completely violated and by the highest
[Guest]: judicial officer of the country.
[Guest]: And in this particular bench, what they were determining was, it was in reference and they
[Guest]: said they called it a matter of the highest public interest or public concern.
[Guest]: And they basically sat in judgment on whether the complaint is valid or not, right?
[Guest]: And you can imagine that the person heading the bench is the person against whom the complaint
[Guest]: is made.
[Guest]: So even someone completely untrained in law, a two year old would understand that this
[Guest]: is not fair or just.
[Guest]: Now when it was pointed out that this is a problem, by they I mean the Supreme Court
[Guest]: decided to have an internal committee or an ICC as they call it in the Sexual Harassment
[Guest]: at the Workplace Act.
[Guest]: So the ICC had three justices, Justice Ramana, Justice Indira Banerjee and Justice Bhopte.
[Guest]: Now the problem was Justice Ramana before he sat on this particular internal committee
[Guest]: had already revealed to the press that he thought this was a false complaint.
[Guest]: So once again, someone who had already sat in judgment of the matter and really didn't
[Guest]: have an open mind was placed on this committee.
[Guest]: So when the complainant brought this to his attention, he had to recuse himself.
[Guest]: The complainant also brought another fact to their attention saying that it had only
[Guest]: one woman on the panel, whereas the POSH guidelines require that there should be at least 50%
[Guest]: of the committee has to be women.
[Guest]: So then they replaced Justice Ramana with Justice Indu Malhotra.
[Guest]: And this particular panel sat and met, there were other violations of their own POSH guidelines,
[Guest]: which is that there was no external member.
[Guest]: She was not allowed to bring a lawyer to the proceedings.
[Guest]: The proceedings weren't recorded.
[Guest]: No external member was allowed to participate in it.
[Guest]: And all this was basically some kind of like an internal mechanism to deal with a problem
[Guest]: against their own superior.
[Guest]: So it was very clear that the other justices were also floundering because basically they're
[Guest]: hearing something against their boss.
[Guest]: So in this kind of a panel, it's even more important that an external member be present
[Guest]: and that external member be someone of a very, very high stature, which is quite easy for
[Guest]: the Supreme Court.
[Guest]: You know, they can bring in a retired justice, they can bring in a retired female justice,
[Guest]: you know, like Justice Rumapal or someone else who has such a stellar reputation.
[Guest]: So this could have very easily been avoided, but clearly they didn't want to avoid it.
[Guest]: And finally, what happened is the complainant withdrew her complaint, not because she admitted
[Guest]: that, you know, this was not a genuine complaint.
[Guest]: She said she has absolutely no hope of getting a fair hearing or justice with this panel
[Guest]: at this institution.
[Guest]: And she is unfortunately right.
[Guest]: And it just really distressed me like this entire series of events.
[Guest]: It felt like the Supreme Court was doubling down on each mistake one after the other.
[Amit Varma]: And it just really distressed me.
[Amit Varma]: And isn't it the case that all of these guidelines, which this so-called posh committee did not
[Amit Varma]: follow were guidelines originally set by the Supreme Court itself, right?
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So they seem to behave in a fashion that the rules they make must apply to everyone else
[Guest]: and they must not apply to themselves.
[Amit Varma]: So wouldn't you say that in a sense that the court could itself be set to be in contempt
[Amit Varma]: of court?
[Guest]: Yes and no, because the contempt laws are not following a very specific judgment, right?
[Guest]: But the court also has the ability to interpret rules in its own way.
[Guest]: So this is a play of words and you could go either way with this.
[Guest]: But yes, if you strictly think of it as the same rules that apply to everyone else must
[Guest]: also apply to the members of the judiciary, then they are really violating all of those
[Guest]: principles.
[Guest]: In a very brazen way, like all this is not hidden.
[Guest]: This is all happening in, it's playing out in the media, only partially playing out in
[Guest]: the media.
[Guest]: Frankly, the media was muzzled quite a bit.
[Guest]: A lot of newspapers are scared to run stories about the Supreme Court because they're worried
[Guest]: they'll be held in contempt.
[Guest]: A lot of people are scared to speak up.
[Guest]: The people most qualified to speak up are from the legal community who unfortunately
[Guest]: have a lot of cases pending before the judiciary.
[Guest]: So even though the Bar Council and the Supreme Court advocates on record and all these people
[Guest]: came forward and they issued statements condemning the procedural mess, it's very difficult for
[Guest]: scrutiny to come from people who really depend on the Chief Justice of India to get the matters
[Guest]: through.
[Guest]: So there's a really big problem, you know, systemic problem that is taking place.
[Amit Varma]: And what's also kind of bizarre is, as you wrote in your piece, is that the case became
[Amit Varma]: politicized very fast with cabinet ministers jumping in to defend the Chief Justice where
[Amit Varma]: it had really nothing to do with them.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, why should they get involved?
[Guest]: So this is the thing that is very worrying, right?
[Guest]: So it seems like any time, so, okay, to me in a civilized society, no one should know
[Guest]: names of specific justices, you know, to me, that would be the most civilized society of
[Guest]: all.
[Guest]: You know, maybe, you know, if there was a new Chief Justice sworn in or something, you
[Guest]: know his name, but justice should be based on principles so much so that it doesn't have
[Guest]: any individuals deep imprint on it.
[Guest]: And we don't think of individuals as partisan and taking sides.
[Guest]: When the government and cabinet ministers, the Attorney General, the Solicitor General,
[Guest]: they all came out of the woodwork within hours, they completely rubbish the complaint and
[Guest]: malign the reputation of the complainant without knowing all the facts because the complaint
[Guest]: had been made like 48 hours before all this happened.
[Guest]: And they immediately took the side of the Chief Justice, which shows that something
[Guest]: is going on, right?
[Guest]: They want, they think he's their guy or they want him to be at the helm and they don't
[Guest]: want him to resign or be impeached and so on.
[Guest]: So that makes one extremely suspicious of what is going on.
[Guest]: And if you remember Chief Justice Gogoi, who was just a, you know, a senior justice prior
[Guest]: to this, when Deepak Mishra was the Chief Justice, there was a press conference that
[Guest]: before senior most judges held.
[Guest]: And the only person who flipped his stance later was Justice Gogoi.
[Guest]: And he was the next in line to be appointed Chief Justice of India.
[Guest]: And it all seems very messy and complicated in terms of it's very opaque on how justices
[Guest]: and Chief Justices are appointed and promoted.
[Guest]: So it's very unclear where the alliances lie, and precisely why the current government and
[Guest]: the current executive want to support this particular Chief Justice.
[Amit Varma]: Right, so let's step back for a moment and, you know, take a much broader view of what
[Amit Varma]: our justice system is like, what is the role the Supreme Court plays in it?
[Amit Varma]: What are its duties?
[Amit Varma]: What is it supposed to do?
[Amit Varma]: So now, you know, we can get a clearer sense of what is going wrong specifically now.
[Amit Varma]: So take me back in time, like, you know, our modern justice system as it is now really
[Amit Varma]: came about in 1950, right?
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So a little bit before that, in the sense that we had a functioning set of high courts,
[Guest]: and a federal court, which was called the British Federal Court, which eventually became
[Guest]: the Supreme Court.
[Guest]: Of course, at the time, the British Federal Court was not the highest court of appeal,
[Guest]: the Privy Council in London was the highest court of appeal.
[Guest]: So in that sense, you know, sort of the infrastructure we inherited from colonial times, but the
[Guest]: constitution making process from 1946 to 1950, one of the big differences, so as you know,
[Guest]: India inherited or at least pretty much exactly adopted the existing parliamentary system,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So whatever was the British Westminster system was continued in India, and, you know, very
[Guest]: few tweaks were made to it.
[Guest]: But there was one major difference from the colonial government, which is England does
[Guest]: not, or at least at that time, did not have independent judicial review.
[Guest]: That is an American inheritance for us, right?
[Guest]: What we mean by independent judicial review is that the judiciary will provide a check
[Guest]: and a balance, both to the executive and to the legislature.
[Guest]: So if the executive makes any kinds of actions, which are unconstitutional, the institution
[Guest]: that will adjudicate whether or not it is unconstitutional, and then nullify that particular
[Guest]: order is the judiciary.
[Guest]: This comes from an old court case called Marbury versus Madison in America.
[Guest]: That was the sort of the starting point of independent judicial review.
[Guest]: Now in that particular case, it also applied to the legislature, right?
[Guest]: Now this was not true of England.
[Guest]: The parliament could only, was sovereign in England, sovereign in the sense, you know,
[Guest]: in terms of checks and balances, and the courts could only review executive action, but they
[Guest]: could not review legislative action, right?
[Guest]: So this is one major difference between what was going on in England in 1950 and what was
[Guest]: happening in India in 1950.
[Guest]: And Ambedkar, who of course studied at Columbia and a whole host of other legal minds in India
[Guest]: who were very inspired by the American system, thought that it is crucial to have independent
[Guest]: judicial review in a constitutional setup that guarantees fundamental rights.
[Guest]: So you need to have writ jurisdiction, which means there are a host of writs that individuals
[Guest]: have where they can petition the court and say, my rights have been violated, and you
[Guest]: need to look into this matter and therefore either approve or nullify the executive action
[Guest]: or the particular, you know, bill or act, which has violated my rights.
[Guest]: Now, incidentally, the court took to this immediately and very quickly, like all the
[Guest]: justices who were justices at the time of the birth of the republic, they were very
[Guest]: well versed with what independent judicial review means, even though they hadn't come
[Guest]: from that system.
[Guest]: So they knew how to interpret the law, they knew how to think about these principles,
[Guest]: and they knew that for the constitution to have any real value, you need to be able to
[Guest]: very clearly define when legislation and when executive action violates the constitution.
[Guest]: And that's really where independent judicial review comes in from.
[Guest]: Now, why is it important that this kind of judicial review is independent?
[Guest]: It is so that the judiciary is not subject to the arbitrary actions of the executive
[Guest]: for the legislature, right, that it has its own place.
[Guest]: And one of the ways to make the judiciary independent is that its appointment procedure
[Guest]: is independent, right?
[Guest]: So that is really where this kind of system comes from.
[Guest]: Ambedkar was a very big advocate to push through this kind of independent judicial review.
[Guest]: And he felt that the judiciary must be both independent of the executive, but it also
[Guest]: needs to be competent.
[Guest]: So how do you balance these two things, right?
[Guest]: Now, the executive represents the people of India after being elected through the legislature.
[Guest]: They are the people who really govern, so they are the ones in charge of the appointments.
[Guest]: But how do we make sure that the people making appointments are also removed from the people
[Guest]: whom they appoint?
[Guest]: So there are a whole host of procedures to make sure that the judiciary is independent.
[Guest]: One of these is that no high court or Supreme Court judge can be removed except for an impeachment
[Guest]: proceeding, right?
[Guest]: So judicial officers at the highest courts can only be impeached, they can't just be,
[Guest]: you know, dismissed.
[Guest]: And they have a term which ends when they reach the age of 62 in the case of the high
[Guest]: courts and 65 in the case of the Supreme Court.
[Guest]: So they only retire based on their date of birth, right, they can't be manipulated and
[Guest]: forced to retire early or pushed or get an extension or retire later.
[Guest]: So there were a bunch of safeguards like this.
[Guest]: And the most important part of this procedure was Article 124 for the Supreme Court appointments
[Guest]: and Article 217 for the high court appointments, which basically said that the president shall
[Guest]: make the appointment.
[Guest]: And when we say the president, we really mean the cabinet, and he shall do so in consultation
[Guest]: with the Chief Justice of India, right?
[Guest]: And now, for the last 70 plus years, there is a huge question over what is the meaning
[Guest]: of the word consultation, right?
[Guest]: In case of a disagreement, whose voice prevails?
[Guest]: You know, does the Chief Justice's view become binding?
[Guest]: Does the cabinet's view become binding?
[Guest]: And exactly how do you deal with this problem, right, when there is a disagreement?
[Guest]: So that has been sort of the centerpiece of independence of judiciary in India for the
[Guest]: last 70 years.
[Amit Varma]: So let me try to kind of recap that and tell me if I understood it correctly.
[Amit Varma]: Basically, it wasn't always the case that the judiciary is independent of both the executive
[Amit Varma]: and the legislature.
[Amit Varma]: And what Ambedkar did was he followed the American precedent of making it independent
[Amit Varma]: of both the executive and the legislature and the purpose of the judiciary therefore
[Amit Varma]: became to ensure that the rules that were set in the Constitution and our laws applied
[Amit Varma]: to everybody equally, including the executive and the legislature, which brings about the
[Amit Varma]: dilemma of how do you do this, if the judiciary itself is going to be appointed by the people
[Amit Varma]: who it's supposed to control?
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, you and I have discussed and this was again a question I had for a
[Amit Varma]: later part, but might as well bring it up now is that, you know, the same way that we
[Amit Varma]: apply public choice theory to governments where we talk about, you know, the incentives
[Amit Varma]: in play, a, I guess the same principles would apply to the judiciary and B, in this case,
[Amit Varma]: it would seem to me that the incentives for those in government would always be to select
[Amit Varma]: pliant judges, and then keep seeding the Supreme Courts and the high courts with pliant judges
[Amit Varma]: and manipulate the system in that way.
[Amit Varma]: So what is sort of a history of those kinds of tensions playing out?
[Amit Varma]: And how has the judiciary stayed independent to begin with, for whatever time it did stay
[Guest]: independent?
[Guest]: So you have really hit the pulse of the matter.
[Guest]: So you and I have talked a lot about, you know, what are the kind of rules in place
[Guest]: and what are the incentives based on the rules.
[Guest]: But I want to also state the importance of convention and of statesman like leaders here
[Guest]: a little bit.
[Guest]: So in the 1950s, you know, when, so what happened was that the Chief Justice of the British
[Guest]: Federal Court was Chief Justice Kanya, when we adopted the constitution.
[Guest]: So the day we adopted the constitution, the British Federal Court became the Supreme Court
[Guest]: of India, and Chief Justice Kanya became the Chief Justice of India.
[Guest]: Okay, when Chief Justice Kanya died in office soon after, the next most senior justice was
[Guest]: Justice Patanjali Shastri.
[Guest]: Now it is believed that Nehru, who was at the time the Prime Minister and therefore
[Guest]: representing the cabinet, he preferred Justice MC Mahajan, who was at the Bombay High Court
[Guest]: at the time.
[Guest]: And it was quite clear that that was his preference.
[Guest]: But all the Supreme Court justices threatened to resign if the next most senior justice
[Guest]: did not automatically become the Chief Justice.
[Guest]: And that is really the beginning of the convention that the next senior most justice will become
[Guest]: the Chief Justice and serve whether that term is for two days or for 10 years.
[Guest]: You know, this is not written anywhere in the constitution, like there's no text that
[Guest]: supports this, but it is convention.
[Guest]: And it is also like we must applaud Nehru that when he felt that there was pushback
[Guest]: from the judiciary on one of his decisions.
[Guest]: And by the way, Justice MC Mahajan was a legendary judge, right?
[Guest]: This is a time actually when the Supreme Court of India, which used to be the British Federal
[Guest]: Court, was really not that important.
[Guest]: You know, they were the highest court of appeal.
[Guest]: They got very few cases, usually on like very boring matters of law.
[Guest]: The busy and important courts for the high courts, they did the bulk of the work.
[Guest]: So it was really your high court judges who were sort of superstars.
[Guest]: And it seems like Nehru picked one such superstar, you know, who had, I mean, it's not like he
[Guest]: just picked some random client guy, like he was really, by any standards, an excellent
[Guest]: judge.
[Guest]: But Nehru knew when to step back and respect the authority of institutions.
[Guest]: And Nehru was so popular, frankly, he had said, yeah, go ahead and resign.
[Guest]: You know, this is a country full of British trained lawyers.
[Guest]: I can replace you guys tomorrow.
[Guest]: He could have easily done that.
[Guest]: But Nehru knew that there will never be respect for the Supreme Court if it wasn't viewed
[Guest]: as independent by all the stakeholders in society.
[Guest]: So he knew when to step back.
[Guest]: So I want to, you know, sort of emphasize the importance of convention here.
[Guest]: It is very difficult to put down every rule in writing and then interpret every rule,
[Guest]: especially by the same court that, you know, needs to interpret the rule in its own matter.
[Guest]: So in these kinds of situations, the convention really kicks in.
[Guest]: And from 1951 to 1973, we had a very clear procedure of appointment.
[Guest]: It was, of course, I mean, even in those years, there are some examples where it seems like
[Guest]: there's some executive influence.
[Guest]: But it largely seems like very good, qualified people were appointed, that the Chief Justice
[Guest]: of India's opinion always had very, very high consideration or regard.
[Guest]: And if there were politically motivated appointments or transfers, it wasn't a rampant thing.
[Guest]: It might have been a one-off thing, right?
[Guest]: So that's the situation until 1973.
[Guest]: Now, you and I have talked about, in an episode, we've talked about property rights for over
[Guest]: an hour.
[Guest]: And if we just reference back to that episode, we talked about how the constitution kept
[Guest]: getting amended by the parliament, especially by the Indira Gandhi government, because the
[Guest]: judiciary kept interpreting the constitution as it is written, right?
[Guest]: So one of the consequences of that was that if you keep amending the constitution, the
[Guest]: courts are going to say, hey, this is very problematic.
[Guest]: You can't just amend the constitution anytime we enforce the constitution.
[Guest]: So in 1967, there's a case called Golaknath, where the Supreme Court in 11 judge bench
[Guest]: held that the constitution is unamendable by the parliament, that fundamental rights
[Guest]: cannot be amended.
[Guest]: This was in 1967.
[Guest]: Now the matter got appealed and in a case called Kesavanandarthi versus State of Kerala.
[Guest]: And this was a 13 judge bench.
[Guest]: Again, the question was, does the parliament have the authority to amend the constitution?
[Guest]: And this is the case where the basic structure doctrine was created and the court basically
[Guest]: said that the parliament has the authority to amend the constitution, but this is not
[Guest]: an unlimited authority.
[Guest]: There is a core to the constitution that is inviolable and unamendable.
[Guest]: We call that the basic structure.
[Guest]: Basically it is things like federalism, democracy, secularism, independent judiciary, and so
[Guest]: on.
[Guest]: And if the parliament amends any of these parts, we can strike down that constitutional
[Guest]: amendment.
[Guest]: Now, the interesting thing is in this particular case, the court didn't say exactly what the
[Guest]: basic structure of the constitution is.
[Guest]: They didn't give us a list, right?
[Guest]: They said, we will know when we see it, we'll decide on a case by case basis.
[Guest]: There's a lot of politics and it's a fascinating story how this case came about, but the decision
[Guest]: was given on April 24, 1973, which was also the last date of the term of Chief Justice
[Guest]: Sikri.
[Guest]: So Chief Justice Sikri knew that this is going to create a huge fallout.
[Guest]: And as soon as it is announced, they wrote their separate opinions.
[Guest]: Chief H.R. Khanna was one of the instrumental people in coming up with the basic structure
[Guest]: of the constitution.
[Guest]: And it was a seven, six judgment.
[Guest]: And there were like lots of dissenting opinions, really convoluted, it runs into thousands
[Guest]: of pages.
[Guest]: And one of the justices who wholeheartedly was on the side of the government was Justice
[Guest]: A.N. Ray.
[Guest]: So when Chief Justice Sikri retired, there were three justices, right?
[Guest]: Justice Shellach, Justice Grover, Justice Hegde, who were next in line.
[Guest]: And then there was Justice A.N. Ray.
[Guest]: Now Indira Gandhi, knowing that these justices had sided against the government in this particular
[Guest]: opinion, violated what is the fundamental principle of independent judiciary, which
[Guest]: is that justices must not be rewarded or penalized for their judicial opinions.
[Guest]: So the day after Sikri retires, instead of appointing the next in line, she supersedes
[Guest]: three senior judges and then appoints Justice A.N. Ray as the Chief Justice of India.
[Guest]: And this is the first time anything like this had happened in India.
[Guest]: It was like a complete shock.
[Guest]: Of course, this is the time of like great statesman.
[Guest]: And within a day, justices Shellach, Grover, Hegde, all of them resigned from the bench,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So in a sense, Indira Gandhi got exactly what she wanted.
[Guest]: She superseded three justices who were against her, which created three vacancies.
[Guest]: And now she had A.N. Ray, who was known as her man, though it's not clear if there was
[Guest]: any specific reward and punishment system between A.N. Ray and the government.
[Guest]: And she was hoping that A.N. Ray will reconstitute a bench within a month or so and re-look at
[Guest]: Keshavanand Bharti.
[Guest]: Now, thankfully, that didn't happen.
[Guest]: And that's a whole other story.
[Guest]: But this is the first instance of this kind of seniority being violated.
[Guest]: Indira Gandhi also started or at least pushed forth the trend of transferring justices when
[Guest]: they gave opinions against the government, right?
[Guest]: This is most evident in cases like ADM, Shivkanth Shukla.
[Guest]: This is the habeas corpus case at the peak of the emergency, right?
[Guest]: And Justice Rangarajan, who was then the high court judge, who gave the judgment, was immediately
[Guest]: transferred to Guwahati High Court, which is kind of a penalty posting, as they say,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: There are some big high courts from where you typically get moved up, and that's what
[Guest]: happened to Justice Rangarajan.
[Guest]: Justice HR Khanna, who when, you know, ADM Shivkanth Shukla was appealed to the Supreme
[Guest]: Court, he gave his opinion against the government and against the government actions and held
[Guest]: up the fundamental rights of individuals.
[Guest]: And when he was the next senior most justice, he was superseded, right?
[Guest]: So once again, Justice Baig, who was junior to Justice HR Khanna, was made chief justice
[Guest]: by superseding HR Khanna, immediately the day after HR Khanna resigned, right?
[Guest]: So there were these two instances where senior Supreme Court judges were superseded, where
[Guest]: justices at the high court and the Supreme Court were transferred for things that they,
[Guest]: you know, did in their professional capacity, enforcing independent judicial review, which
[Guest]: was their job.
[Guest]: And this was really a huge attack on the institution of the independence of the judiciary.
[Guest]: Meanwhile, during the emergency, the Indira Gandhi government also passed the 42nd Amendment,
[Guest]: which severely restricted independent judicial review, you know, and thankfully the emergency
[Guest]: ended and Janata government, which came in 77, 78, undid a lot of the 42nd Amendment
[Guest]: and the 43rd and 44th Amendment, and they restored all the rules of the judiciary back
[Guest]: to the 1950 set of rules, right?
[Guest]: So all the mischief was in some sense undone, but the judiciary has never recovered from
[Guest]: this blow in the sense that there is always a feeling that there is too much executive
[Guest]: interference and there's always a threat that if any Supreme Court or high court judge gives
[Guest]: an opinion that is against the government, the government uses all of its influence and
[Guest]: might to try to undermine the career of that particular judge or to transfer them or to
[Guest]: make sure that they are never appointed to the Supreme Court if they're a high court
[Guest]: judge and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So this is really the core of the fallout of the actions of Indira Gandhi, right?
[Guest]: So this stuff was brewing a little bit before her also, but before her, we had leaders who
[Guest]: were statesmen who knew when to stop, you know, the rules were equally unclear all along,
[Guest]: but the statesmen knew when to stop and when not to push.
[Amit Varma]: So I have kind of three related questions.
[Amit Varma]: And what you just said kind of brought me back to the sort of the first of them.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll ask the first two together.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, you and I both agree, and we've often written about how democracies
[Amit Varma]: and systems of government can't rely on having good people and great leaders at the top.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, what you need is good rules and good structures.
[Amit Varma]: So that even if somebody who is a demagogue or a bad person comes to power, they can't
[Amit Varma]: really do much damage.
[Amit Varma]: What is important are sort of the rules in place.
[Amit Varma]: And the first part of this narrative about the independence of the judiciary seems to
[Amit Varma]: rely on, to begin with, in the first instance, the statesmanship of Nehru in letting that
[Amit Varma]: convention be established at the senior most judge be made the Chief Justice of India,
[Amit Varma]: and not insisting on Justice Mahajan getting that post.
[Amit Varma]: And then that convention continues, because like you said that they were sort of all these
[Amit Varma]: statesmen who were doing the right thing.
[Amit Varma]: But then the point is, you can't rely on statesmen doing the right thing for the system to work.
[Amit Varma]: So my question, therefore, is that, again, like two questions.
[Amit Varma]: Question number one, what kind of rules should there have been in place that could possibly
[Amit Varma]: have enforced that kind of independence of the judiciary, number one?
[Amit Varma]: And number two, how does it work in other countries, where also the judiciary is notionally
[Amit Varma]: independent?
[Amit Varma]: Like, would the US be an example of another such country?
[Amit Varma]: And there also the appointment of Supreme Court judges is very politicized, isn't it?
[Guest]: Yeah, so two things.
[Guest]: So you're absolutely right, you know, you and I, because of our public choice, interest
[Guest]: and background, we focus on rules and institutions, and we say you can't rely on people.
[Guest]: Having said that, people do interpret the rules, right?
[Guest]: So when there are good people, the same set of rules, good or bad, tend to come up with
[Guest]: slightly better outcomes than when they are bad people.
[Guest]: But your larger point is absolutely right.
[Guest]: Rules need to be robust to even the worst kind, right?
[Guest]: My dissertation advisor, Peter Bedke, always used to say, you don't write rules as if Mother
[Guest]: Teresa is going to enforce them.
[Guest]: You write rules as if Joseph Stalin is going to enforce them.
[Amit Varma]: So that still remains true.
[Amit Varma]: Like, for example, what you pointed out earlier, you know, that the controversy over what does
[Amit Varma]: the word consultation mean and consultation with the CGI.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd imagine that good well framed rules would not leave any ambiguity like that in
[Amit Varma]: the books.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I mean, this is definitely a flaw in the text of the Constitution.
[Guest]: I mean, it would be charitable to say that the framers goofed this up, but they really
[Guest]: did mess it up.
[Guest]: You know, a consultation, deliberation, these are not the kinds of words that you want to
[Guest]: have in a constitutional document.
[Guest]: You want to have very, very clear procedures on how people are appointed, right?
[Guest]: So second, if you do put in the word consultation because you want it to be an amicable decision
[Guest]: as opposed to, you know, pitting one institution against the other, you still need to clarify
[Guest]: who has supremacy in case of disagreement, right?
[Guest]: Now in any kind of panel, even judicial benches, we have an odd number of members on the panel.
[Guest]: Now why do we do that?
[Guest]: Now in an ideal world, we would like opinions to be unanimous or not just have a narrow
[Guest]: majority, but we still have an odd number because if it's an even number, it could be
[Guest]: a split and then you don't know where to go from there, right?
[Guest]: So even our common sense panels and decisions always have odd numbers, right?
[Guest]: So now odd number panel, those are conventions.
[Guest]: Those are not like they are not written in the text of the Constitution, but it's such
[Guest]: a strong and commonsensical and obvious convention.
[Guest]: But the reason for the convention is to break deadlock, right?
[Guest]: So having words like consultation and not having a backup procedure to break deadlock
[Guest]: when the consultative process fails, in my opinion, that is probably the biggest flaw
[Guest]: in Article 124, Article 217 and Article 222, which is about transfer of judges.
[Guest]: So one possible defense in the framers is that they were genuinely extraordinary statesmen.
[Guest]: You know, the people who crafted our constitution, because they were surrounded by other people
[Guest]: like them who were so well-meaning and so well-educated and so public spirited in their
[Guest]: service.
[Guest]: I think they imagined that is the quality of leaders we will elect and they didn't think
[Guest]: that there would be a possibility of future elected leaders who would be self-serving
[Guest]: and violate these documents so badly.
[Guest]: So that is the most charitable thing I can say in defense of the framers.
[Guest]: Now coming to your second question, you're absolutely right.
[Guest]: It is complicated the world over, different countries have different procedures for appointment.
[Guest]: In America, the way they have ensured judicial independence is to have a life term appointment
[Guest]: at the Supreme Court level, right?
[Guest]: And there are pros and cons of this kind of appointment.
[Guest]: So the pro is once you get on the Supreme Court bench in the US Supreme Court, you serve
[Guest]: until the end of, you know, whenever you choose to step down for medical or health reasons
[Guest]: or when you die.
[Guest]: So it's a life appointment, right?
[Guest]: And that means that justices can serve on the Supreme Court bench for 40 years, 50 years
[Guest]: if you appoint someone young, right?
[Guest]: So that's that.
[Guest]: And over 50 years, you are going to give countless decisions every year, but you cannot be penalized
[Guest]: for any of those decisions, nor can you be rewarded for any of those decisions because
[Guest]: there is no job waiting for you after that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but there the issue is that the post that the judge already holds is the reward,
[Amit Varma]: you know, being a judge on the Supreme Court, it's not as if they will do something with
[Amit Varma]: the expectation of reward after it, they've already got the reward, and they can be an
[Amit Varma]: implicit or explicit quid pro quo involved for that.
[Guest]: So you know, that's the end.
[Guest]: No one can hold you to it, right?
[Guest]: Like, let's say there were a whole group of like unsavory people who got me elected to
[Unknown]: the bench, right, or appointed to the bench.
[Guest]: Now, because it's a life term appointment, I mean, if I choose to write what I choose
[Guest]: to write, so be it like they can't do anything after that.
[Guest]: Right, they can't do anything to influence me after that, after that, I'm sort of in
[Guest]: a bubble.
[Guest]: Now, it just so happens that the vetting process is so detailed, they pull out law review articles
[Guest]: and op-eds you wrote when you were 19 years old.
[Guest]: And they're very, very, very careful that you hold the views that you say you hold.
[Guest]: Having said that, if they appoint someone to the Supreme Court bench at age 45 or 50,
[Guest]: and it's a life appointment, and you're on the bench for the next 40 years, who says
[Guest]: you can't change your mind?
[Guest]: You know, who says you can't change your mind the very next day?
[Guest]: Now, the Indian Supreme Court works a little bit differently.
[Guest]: The retirement age was 65, because at the time of the founding of the country, the life
[Guest]: expectancy wasn't that high.
[Guest]: But today, 65 is a very low retirement age, given that life expectancy has increased.
[Guest]: So what's happening is most Supreme Court judges take on some role immediately after
[Guest]: they retire from the Supreme Court, and it typically tends to be government tribunals
[Guest]: and panels.
[Guest]: And guess who appoints people to the government tribunal and panels?
[Guest]: It's the executive.
[Guest]: So now you have this very big problem of post-judicial appointments.
[Guest]: And there has been some very interesting research on this particular issue.
[Guest]: So I know we're reading a little bit of what we were talking about just a minute ago.
[Guest]: But I want to emphasize that appointment procedure is not the only way to be independent.
[Guest]: There are other important ways to be independent, which is what is the salary that is given
[Guest]: to a judge, which is whether judges are transferred between high courts, which doesn't happen
[Guest]: in America.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: I mean, every state is its own sort of like contained unit.
[Guest]: You're not transferring judges from one state to another.
[Guest]: So that is another kind of mechanism.
[Guest]: And it's a lifetime appointment.
[Guest]: So a couple of years ago, Madhav Ane, Shubhankar Dam and Giovanni Koh, they actually looked
[Guest]: at post-retirement appointments of Supreme Court judges and compared them to whether
[Guest]: these judges authored favorable judgments in important cases just before they retired.
[Guest]: And guess what they find?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I'd imagine the incentives play out as you'd expect them to play out, right?
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: They actually write favorable judgments because Supreme Court justices are also human.
[Guest]: They want a nice house in, you know, Abdul Kalam Road with a car with a red light on
[Guest]: it and a whole staff and all the perks that come with it.
[Guest]: And they're basically fitted on this tribunal or that tribunal, you know, Election Commission,
[Guest]: Right to Information Commission, this office, that office, there's a whole host of appointments
[Guest]: that is possible.
[Guest]: It makes a significant difference to the pay and the lifestyle of these justices.
[Guest]: So while all the focus has been on appointment procedure alone, that is not the only way
[Guest]: to be independent.
[Guest]: We have managed to create a very pliant judiciary even when the appointment procedure is not
[Guest]: interfered with, right?
[Guest]: By post-retirement carrots, so to speak.
[Guest]: So there are many differences and there are many ways to skin this cat.
[Guest]: So if you think about it, the U.S. Supreme Court has nominees are appointed by the executive,
[Guest]: but they are vetted by the legislature, which is you need a Senate confirmation hearing,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So that is highly political process.
[Guest]: It is not at all independent, but somehow it manages to protect the independence of
[Guest]: the judge once the judge is on the bench and becomes a Supreme Court justice, right?
[Guest]: So you can have a very political process and that still ensures independence, or you can
[Guest]: have a very insular process, which is completely separate from the politics and still have
[Guest]: a not so independent system.
[Amit Varma]: So in fact, looking at our system, it would actually be remarkable to me if our judiciary
[Amit Varma]: was independent.
[Amit Varma]: It seems it's designed to set up a dependence of the judiciary on the executive.
[Amit Varma]: What do you think?
[Amit Varma]: And I'm sure this has been discussed massively over the last few decades.
[Amit Varma]: So what are the kind of steps that could have been taken or could be taken to make independence
[Amit Varma]: more likely?
[Guest]: So again, I want to take you back a little bit to the history of what happened, you know,
[Guest]: so post Indira Gandhi's actions in the 70s and the horror of the emergency, transferring
[Guest]: so many judges during the emergency really became like a farce, what was going on.
[Guest]: The legal community thought that it needs to do something, right?
[Guest]: So there were a series of challenges on appointment procedure, because, you know, it became very
[Guest]: clear that the appointment and the transfer procedure is not very clear and we need to
[Guest]: come up with something.
[Guest]: So the first of these cases is called the first judges case.
[Guest]: It was in 1982, S.P. Gupta versus Union of India.
[Guest]: And in this particular case, the court was asked, so exactly what does this consultative
[Guest]: process mean, right?
[Guest]: So the court simply said that it limited the unfettered power of the executive, right?
[Guest]: The consultation should be full, the chief justice's opinion must be recorded, it must
[Guest]: be considered, it can't be easily disregarded.
[Guest]: Having said that, the chief justice of India's opinion on appointments and transfers is not
[Guest]: binding.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So that was the first judges case.
[Guest]: Now, this is a very traditional interpretation because nowhere in the constitution does it
[Guest]: seem to suggest that the judiciary's opinion on appointments should be binding.
[Guest]: So in a sense, even in the 1980s, the Supreme Court justices were not very activist and
[Guest]: still conservative and they were interpreting the text of the constitution.
[Guest]: But as we know, since the 80s, after post-emergency, there was like a two-year Janata government
[Guest]: period.
[Guest]: And then after that, it was back to politics as usual.
[Guest]: So all the usual shenanigans started.
[Guest]: And there was a really important question of how do we really protect the independence
[Guest]: of judges?
[Guest]: And this brings me to the second judges case, right?
[Guest]: This was a case in 93, and it was basically the legal community, the Supreme Court's advocates
[Guest]: on record who questioned once again, the existing procedure in articles 124, 217, and 222, right?
[Guest]: And they said, there are poor procedural safeguards.
[Guest]: So what do we do now?
[Guest]: This is perhaps the most activist judicial opinion written, not just by the Supreme Court
[Guest]: of India, but any court anywhere in the world, right?
[Guest]: They basically created a new procedure to appoint Supreme Court and high court judges
[Guest]: out of thin air.
[Guest]: And if you compare the procedure to what is the text of the constitution, you will think
[Guest]: you are in two different countries and the pages got mixed up.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So what they did was they said, we're going to create a collegium system.
[Guest]: The collegium is led by the Supreme Court of India and two of the senior most judges.
[Guest]: And these three people will come up with a list of who needs to be appointed and who
[Guest]: needs to be transferred.
[Guest]: And they will give this list to the cabinet or the president who actually, in whose name
[Guest]: the appointments are made and their recommendations are binding and they cannot be violated.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Now, as you can see, this is a drastically different system from what was actually written
[Guest]: in text.
[Guest]: Some people thought this was the most amazing thing that had ever happened.
[Guest]: And the judiciary had finally come of age and declared its own independence.
[Guest]: Many others felt that this is outrageous and very self-serving activism.
[Guest]: And this is going to create a situation where there is no external scrutiny or check on
[Guest]: the judiciary.
[Guest]: And it's basically a self-appointing system, right?
[Guest]: Only the current chief justice of India determines who are the next people who rise to the bench.
[Guest]: So it's extremely problematic.
[Guest]: A presidential reference was made in 1998.
[Guest]: The president of India can ask the Supreme Court to clarify on matters of law or national
[Guest]: importance and so on.
[Guest]: And this presidential reference in 1998, again, the court put in a few more safeguards to
[Guest]: this collegium system.
[Guest]: So it's called the third judge's case.
[Guest]: So they added some more safeguards to the second judge's case.
[Guest]: They said that, you know, the collegium must meet and the minutes must be recorded.
[Guest]: It must be a transparent system.
[Guest]: And the collegium is going to be not this chief justice of India plus two judges, but
[Guest]: chief justice of India and the next four senior most judges.
[Guest]: So the collegium will have five people, right?
[Guest]: And this will be the group that determines who is appointed and who will be promoted
[Guest]: to the Supreme Court and so on.
[Guest]: And they will give their list to cabinet and the president will make these appointments.
[Guest]: Now once again, coming to the importance of convention, when all this was happening in
[Guest]: 1998, you can imagine that if it had been Indira Gandhi, who was the prime minister,
[Guest]: she would have just shut the whole thing down, right?
[Guest]: But it just so happened that people who had lived through the emergency and, you know,
[Guest]: better, more statesmen leaders were beginning to come to power.
[Guest]: And immediately after that is the time of Vajpayee, right?
[Guest]: And it seems to be quite clear that everyone in the executive thought that this is a very
[Guest]: bad idea, but they shouldn't mess with the independence of the judiciary.
[Guest]: And they should respect this opinion, right?
[Guest]: So presidential reference was made.
[Guest]: Once the Supreme Court clarified the matter, the matter was left alone.
[Guest]: So from 1993 until 2015, we had a second system of appointments, which was by collegium.
[Guest]: And before that, you know, from 1951 to 1993 was the first system of appointments, which
[Guest]: was by consultation, right?
[Guest]: Aside from the shenanigans of Indira Gandhi.
[Guest]: So this was really what was going on.
[Guest]: Now you don't need much of a legal education to guess what would happen in a system like
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: So, you know, the usual, which is nepotism, which is not the most qualified people rising
[Guest]: to the bench, but people who have connections, right?
[Guest]: So if you have served and you had on good relationships with the sort of like the elite
[Guest]: judicial coterie, then you are promoted, a lot of children and grandchildren and siblings
[Guest]: of past justices were promoted and they rose to the top.
[Guest]: And some internal corruption really started setting into the court system.
[Guest]: So there was a time when the court system was really beyond reproach.
[Guest]: You know, giants had served on the court and they were really, they held themselves to
[Guest]: such a high standard and never put a foot out of place.
[Guest]: And it was really important that they not only did what is right, but also seemed to
[Guest]: do what is right, which is, you know, hold themselves to a higher standard.
[Guest]: Now, all of them that started disappearing under the collegium system and it became quite
[Guest]: clear that the Supreme Court and all the judges were a little bit like, you know, power drunk
[Guest]: and they thought they could do whatever they wanted.
[Guest]: This is, you know, the eighties, nineties, and since the 2000s, especially the nineties
[Guest]: and the 2000s is also the most activist form of the judiciary.
[Guest]: So the Supreme Court butts its head into every policy matter.
[Guest]: It is legislating from the bench, it passes daily orders on all matters from taxation,
[Guest]: which was never under its purview to the powers of pretty much every other institution, right?
[Guest]: So the Supreme Court has become its own powerful giant and this entire, you know, sort of jugglery
[Guest]: trick worked because the people had a lot of faith in the institution.
[Guest]: So as long as the public supports you, in a sense, you can sort of get away with a lot
[Guest]: of procedural problems, right?
[Guest]: So the people of India thought the Supreme Court is this hallowed institution and that's
[Guest]: really where we get justice through specially petitions and public interest litigations
[Guest]: and all of those things.
[Guest]: And it seems to be the last uncorrupted bastion.
[Guest]: So the Supreme Court got away with this for a long time.
[Guest]: And then once the corruption started becoming more and more public is when, you know, sort
[Guest]: of the music stopped and you had to take stock.
[Amit Varma]: So before we go to that part of the story, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And then when we come back, I also want to ask you more about the activism of the court,
[Amit Varma]: the legislating from the bench, so to speak.
[Unknown]: But first, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Unknown]: So, welcome back to India's Gram Sabhas, one of India's biggest democratic successes since
[Unknown]: independence.
[Unknown]: On Simplified, Chuck and Naren go back in time and talk about moments when human activity
[Unknown]: influenced a change on the earth's geology and ecosystems.
[Unknown]: On Equity Sahiye, brought to you by Motilal Oswald, Shrey Lunkar joins Anupam to discuss
[Unknown]: the Indian automobile sector.
[Unknown]: On Know Your Kanun, Ambar Rana gets into the details of defamation and its exceptions under
[Unknown]: the law.
[Unknown]: On Water Player, Siddharth and Mikhail are previewing the ICC Cricket World Cup 2019
[Unknown]: along with their predictions.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's go on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Shruti Rajgopalan about the state of our judiciary.
[Amit Varma]: And my next question following on from what you were speaking about before the break is
[Amit Varma]: really about judicial activism.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, forgive the newbie question, but my impression of the judiciary always was that
[Amit Varma]: look, the judges are basically supposed to interpret what the laws are or what the Constitution
[Amit Varma]: says and their judgments are on the basis of that.
[Amit Varma]: Their own opinions don't really matter, they can't, to use that phrase, legislate from
[Amit Varma]: the bench.
[Amit Varma]: It's the job of the legislature to legislate.
[Amit Varma]: And what the Supreme Court simply does is that it interprets existing laws and the Constitution
[Amit Varma]: and pass the judgments based on that.
[Amit Varma]: Now, a number of the judgments that we've spoken about in this episode, whether it's,
[Amit Varma]: for example, the basic structure judgment, where I wonder on the basis of what do they
[Amit Varma]: decide what the basic structure is of the Constitution doesn't mention that, or the
[Amit Varma]: 1993 second judge's case, where they decide that there should be a collegium and this
[Amit Varma]: is a procedure and blah, blah, blah, on the basis of what do they decide that or even
[Amit Varma]: the Vishakha judgment, which both of us agree is excellent and a really positive move forward.
[Amit Varma]: But on the basis of what do they arrive at something, because the point is that once
[Amit Varma]: you accept that the judges have a right to sort of legislate from the bench as it were,
[Amit Varma]: then depending on which people are on the bench, they can legislate absolutely anything,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, you know, there are two, three different views on this.
[Guest]: And I finally come to the point that no matter which view you take, the Indian Supreme Court
[Guest]: is still doing the wrong thing.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So the first view is, look, it is always the job of the court to be conservative and not
[Guest]: activist.
[Guest]: And what do we mean by activists?
[Guest]: Now there are two ways to think about the role of the judiciary, right?
[Guest]: So the first is it provides a check and balance.
[Guest]: So you know, whatever the executive and the legislature do to preserve principles of natural
[Guest]: justice and the spirit of the constitution, you need to provide a valid check.
[Guest]: Now, based on this kind of interpretation, if your legislature and executive are going
[Guest]: bonkers, it means your judiciary can go bonkers, right?
[Guest]: So if you have a legislature, which is repeatedly amends the constitution, then you're going
[Guest]: to end up placing the judiciary in a situation where they may also have to exceed their powers
[Guest]: a little bit or their original powers a little bit, or get more creative with their interpretation
[Guest]: to actually give a solid check to the legislature and the executive.
[Guest]: So this kind of activism, most legal scholars are quite comfortable with in the sense that
[Guest]: they feel that the job of the judiciary is to really pursue in a very spirited way, really
[Guest]: pursue the protection of individual rights and the constitution.
[Guest]: So in this sense, a lot of the activism that happens during the emergency, you know, like
[Guest]: Justice HR Khanna's opinion in Keshavanand Bharti or Jabalpur versus ADM Shivkanth Shukla.
[Guest]: These are all legendary cases where there could have been a textbook interpretation
[Guest]: and they went a step ahead of the textbook interpretation.
[Guest]: But the goal was still to protect individual rights and it wasn't self-serving in the sense
[Guest]: that it wasn't increasing the power of the judiciary.
[Amit Varma]: So basically by the spirit of the book, if not the actual words, because the actual words
[Guest]: can be changed at any point.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Now there's another version of what is the role of the judiciary.
[Guest]: So first is checks and balances, right?
[Guest]: The second part of it is a very Adam Smith division of labor kind of view of the judiciary.
[Guest]: In fact, Adam Smith writes about this in The Wealth of Nations, that there are two roles.
[Guest]: One is the functional task, which is, you know, the judiciary's job is really to go
[Guest]: through a lot of evidence procedure and actually adjudicate.
[Guest]: And that's a highly specialized task, right?
[Guest]: The legislature's job is to amalgamate preferences of millions of people.
[Guest]: And that's the legislature's job.
[Guest]: The executive's job is to execute the goals of the government, you know, as conveyed by
[Guest]: the legislature or the preferences of the people.
[Guest]: So these are three very fundamentally different tasks.
[Guest]: You know, this is as different as the butcher, the brewer and the baker.
[Guest]: So in that sense, the one way to think about judicial activism is you're really doing jobs
[Guest]: which are outside your expertise and outside your purview, which is why you must be limited.
[Guest]: So you know, things like fiscal matters, about taxation, about government spending, about,
[Guest]: you know, I'll give you a good example of this.
[Guest]: Now think of the CNG cases.
[Guest]: Do you remember when they changed all the fleet of buses in Delhi and then eventually
[Guest]: in other states from diesel to CNG?
[Amit Varma]: Do you have any?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I remember this.
[Amit Varma]: It happened.
[Amit Varma]: I am fairly old.
[Amit Varma]: So this happened in the early 2000s.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: No, but I mean, you're also not from Delhi.
[Guest]: So you know, you may have not really lived through it.
[Guest]: So this was when the early 2000s, I was in high school, just starting college.
[Guest]: Overnight, the court just, you know, there were a series of cases by MC Mehta, who was
[Guest]: sort of like this environmental activist.
[Guest]: And he said, you know, people of Delhi can't breathe, and you can imagine he said this
[Guest]: like 20 years ago.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Can you imagine what they would say today?
[Guest]: They said the biggest problem is all the particulate matter that comes out of these diesel buses.
[Guest]: We need to make sure that all the diesel buses change to CNG overnight.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Now think about what it takes to change an entire fleet of government and private buses.
[Guest]: You need an infrastructure.
[Guest]: First of all, these buses need to exist.
[Guest]: Then you need to refit them.
[Guest]: Once you refit them, every petrol pump in the city needs to outfit itself with a CNG
[Guest]: station.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Now, the court simply said, change 10,000 buses to CNG.
[Guest]: They gave them a deadline.
[Guest]: The Delhi government violated the deadline.
[Guest]: They gave them a second deadline, the Delhi government violated the deadline.
[Guest]: Supreme Court got so sick of the Delhi government, they just said, diesel buses cannot fly after
[Guest]: such and such date.
[Guest]: And overnight it was like a Soviet Union.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, there were no buses and all the autos and buses, we, even the ones that had CNG,
[Guest]: the lines outside the petrol stations and the CNG stations were, I mean, you really
[Guest]: thought you're living in a shortage Soviet style economy.
[Guest]: Like these four auto rickshaw and bus drivers would stand in line for three or four days
[Guest]: to get one tank full of CNG and then continue again.
[Guest]: So now if you think about this from the point of view of the, you know, functional separation
[Guest]: of powers, not just the checks and balances, this is about specialization and knowledge,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: The courts, which basically adjudicate disputes, which are over a matter of fact or matter
[Guest]: of law, they simply don't know how to execute a transition from system A to system B, which
[Guest]: is a question of governance.
[Guest]: That is squarely in the pocket of the executive.
[Guest]: The court said, Oh, we didn't know that, you know, there will be the CNG problem.
[Guest]: It's like a classic knowledge problem, right?
[Guest]: Of course you can overnight convert and say the buses are going to run on CNG, but you
[Guest]: can't produce CNG out of thin air and make it available exactly where the people need
[Guest]: it to be available.
[Guest]: This would have required the Delhi state government issuing new licenses to all the petrol pumps,
[Guest]: creating new petrol pumps with CNG.
[Guest]: You know, it's a whole infrastructure that takes place and the government knew about
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And it's so funny that the Supreme Court justices who are very smart people didn't know about
[Guest]: it because it's simply not within their purview to know this.
[Guest]: On the second matter, which is this question of, you know, the functional knowledge to
[Guest]: execute on some of these tasks, those are the more like very problematic questions of
[Guest]: judicial interference or judicial activism.
[Guest]: You have ludicrous examples of this.
[Guest]: So the Delhi High Court at one point was trying to legislate or standardize the height of
[Guest]: speed breakers in Delhi.
[Guest]: Is it really the job of the courts to decide what the height of speed breakers is?
[Guest]: And I'll tell you how the matter came about.
[Guest]: Resident welfare associations were randomly building speed breakers near schools or in
[Guest]: front of their house to reduce the number of accidents, right?
[Guest]: Because we have such poor sort of traffic rule following spirit in India.
[Guest]: So people were doing all this and they realized that all the speed breakers are of uneven
[Guest]: heights, which apparently is a matter of national importance.
[Guest]: Someone filed a public interest litigation and the public interest litigation now decided
[Guest]: whether or not you can have speed breakers and how high these speed breakers should be.
[Guest]: And you think about it and you're like, really, the pendency of cases is extraordinary at
[Guest]: this point.
[Guest]: There are people in jail who are being deprived of their rights because the cases are going
[Guest]: on for too long.
[Guest]: There are land dispute cases where the original parties to the case have died waiting for
[Guest]: justice.
[Guest]: And the Supreme Court thinks that the most important thing is to legislate from the bench
[Guest]: on CNG and the, you know, Delhi Bird Sanctuary and the air quality and the height of speed
[Guest]: breakers.
[Guest]: And this list has become extremely long.
[Guest]: There is virtually no area of Indian governance where the Supreme Court has not given its
[Guest]: opinion one way or another.
[Amit Varma]: I'm having this very funny image of Supreme Court judges in their black robes measuring
[Amit Varma]: the height of speed breakers on Delhi streets as CNG autos whizz by and a classic example
[Amit Varma]: of this in a domain which I know fairly well is the interference of the Supreme Court and
[Amit Varma]: the BCCI in Indian cricket.
[Amit Varma]: What the COA is doing where they're completely clueless about how to run Indian cricket and
[Amit Varma]: I don't even know whether they actually have the jurisdiction to interfere in the way they
[Amit Varma]: are, but that's a separate issue.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And it just so happened that, you know, the people of India are so tired of waiting for
[Guest]: procedures and governance and they're so exhausted by executive inaction that they think they
[Guest]: have no choice but to go to the court.
[Guest]: I'll give you another example of activism in the Supreme Court.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And how this activism can be very problematic.
[Guest]: So one of the reasons that the activism started in the 1980s was as a social justice program,
[Guest]: you know, bonded laborers, you know, this is a Badua Mukti Mocha case that came out
[Guest]: of the mining community.
[Guest]: They were like mine workers and bonded laborers who were just living like such a horror in
[Guest]: their daily life and their workplace.
[Guest]: And they didn't have much voice or agency, right?
[Guest]: And through a series of cases, the court started interfering and actually assigning positive
[Guest]: rights.
[Guest]: And another very interesting thing that the Supreme Court did at the time was it reduced
[Guest]: what is called the locus standi requirement, right?
[Guest]: Normally in any court case, the parties to the case need to show that they have standing.
[Guest]: You know, if you wanted to use a very contemporary economic term, it would be skin in the game,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: They have to show that they're actually affected parties in this particular dispute and that's
[Guest]: why they're coming to court.
[Guest]: Now the court said, you know, a lot of the people who are deprived of human rights, like
[Guest]: children, like minorities, Dalits, bonded laborers, they really don't have the agency
[Guest]: to come forward and represent themselves.
[Guest]: So if a public interested or public spirited human being came to represent them, we will
[Guest]: allow it.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Now you can imagine this is such a great thing, right?
[Guest]: I mean, like diluting locus standing so that we can help slum dwellers and we can help
[Guest]: bonded laborers seems like such a, it seems like activism, but the right kind of activism.
[Guest]: Now let me explain the problem with this.
[Guest]: Random people come out of the woodwork representing problems where they are not directly affected,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And if you represent problems where you're not directly affected, one, there is an incentive
[Guest]: problem, but there is also a knowledge problem.
[Guest]: Delhi lawyers who live in elite Delhi areas and Delhi judges who don't take auto rickshaws
[Guest]: and don't take buses are legislating on matters where they have no skin in the game and they
[Guest]: have nothing to lose and everything to gain.
[Guest]: And the other side parties end up being underrepresented.
[Guest]: Now let me give you the worst example of diluting locus standard requirements.
[Guest]: Now if you remember our entire journey in our country with section 377, originally the
[Guest]: Delhi high court in the NAS foundation case had struck down 377 and upheld the right to
[Guest]: same sex consensual relationships, right?
[Guest]: This was a Delhi high court judgment.
[Guest]: This court appealed to the Supreme court and the Supreme court overturned it, right?
[Guest]: This was all the drama that took place before what happened last year.
[Guest]: Now if you look at Supreme court overturning the Delhi high court case and you actually
[Guest]: look into the matter, you'll notice that NAS foundation did not appeal the Delhi high court
[Guest]: judgment.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: The government at the time, which was the UPA government and the Delhi government did
[Guest]: not appeal the case, even though they lost.
[Guest]: They said, you know, the courts have spoken, we leave it be, we are okay with 377 being
[Guest]: struck down.
[Guest]: The person who actually appealed the case was a Hindu astrologer.
[Guest]: Second, this Hindu astrologer was not a party to the original suit.
[Guest]: So it's like there are two, you know, teams playing cricket and now someone who was neither
[Guest]: a player, nor the umpire, nor the spectator, but was, you know, standing and eating mangoes
[Guest]: outside suddenly comes in and says, I think this game and its outcome was unfair.
[Guest]: And the court heard it and they had to, because they are bound now by their own precedent
[Guest]: of diluting standing requirements.
[Guest]: And if anyone can come and appeal anything, guess what?
[Guest]: Anyone will come and appeal anything.
[Guest]: And that is so according to me, that Supreme court case was not just bad law, it was bad
[Guest]: procedure because they just randomly allowed, you know, a third party who had nothing to
[Guest]: do with the case to come in a little too late and they heard the appeal and then they overturned
[Guest]: the case.
[Guest]: So according to me, you know, all the activism of the Supreme court got in the way of all
[Guest]: the activism of the Supreme court, right?
[Guest]: This is the problem with having these terrible inconsistent set of rules and not binding
[Guest]: yourself with procedure.
[Guest]: So when you're asking broader question of judicial activism, some of it has held us
[Guest]: in good stead because I have to say in a world where no other institution was really checking
[Guest]: the power of the government, it was only the judiciary.
[Guest]: Now the poor outcome of that is the judiciary grew too big for its own boots.
[Guest]: It interfered in everything from the speaker's powers to election commission, to how parliament
[Guest]: must be run, to how tax policy must be made.
[Guest]: Now we are in a giant mess where it is very difficult to roll back this kind of authority
[Guest]: without actually interfering with the independence of the courts.
[Guest]: And so now what do we do is kind of the big question going forward.
[Amit Varma]: So our problem is really now a who will watch the watchman kind of problem.
[Amit Varma]: I just wanted to complete your thought.
[Amit Varma]: I think we kind of got waylaid where you were saying that there are three views on judicial
[Amit Varma]: activism.
[Amit Varma]: One was checks and balances, that they act as a balance on an overactive executive.
[Amit Varma]: And the second is the whole division of labor thing.
[Guest]: Oh yes.
[Guest]: And the third, I forgot to mention the third.
[Guest]: The third is that the activism must not be self-serving.
[Guest]: You know, there was a lot of support for the Supreme Court activism as long as it was advocating
[Guest]: genuinely for the powers of others.
[Guest]: You know, the Vishakha case is a classic example.
[Guest]: Did they legislate from the bench?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: As a constitutional economist, do I think that's a good idea?
[Guest]: Absolutely not.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: But was that public support and intellectual support and legal support for the case?
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I mean, worldwide, it was a landmark judgment.
[Guest]: It has been cited in opinions in Europe, in America, in Africa.
[Guest]: It's really an extraordinary case in the sense that the court stepped up when virtually no
[Guest]: other public institutions stepped up.
[Guest]: And frankly, they made rules, right?
[Guest]: They put in rules and guidelines, which is what the courts do from time to time.
[Guest]: They fill in gaps in law.
[Guest]: Now, in this case, of course, they created law from scratch, but it is still somewhat
[Guest]: within their functional expertise, but it was not self-serving, right?
[Guest]: If you look at the second and third judge's case, it's a completely self-serving document,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: It is all about their power.
[Guest]: Now think about it.
[Guest]: If you were genuinely interested in independence of judiciary, wouldn't you increase retirement
[Guest]: age and completely ban Supreme Court justices from taking any government appointment after
[Guest]: their term is over?
[Guest]: That is crucial to independence, right?
[Guest]: But they don't really care about independence.
[Guest]: They care about the fact that they should be allowed to do whatever they want, but also
[Guest]: have their cake and eat it too, right?
[Guest]: So if they want to go the other way and lobby for some government posting, they should be
[Guest]: allowed to do that too.
[Guest]: So I think the court has been very self-serving and disingenuous.
[Guest]: So in some sense, this is not so much about rules and checks and balances, but about the
[Guest]: functional legitimacy of the court.
[Guest]: People are more likely to accept an activist court than the activist court is once again
[Guest]: run by statesmen who know when to do the right thing, and we have not had those people.
[Guest]: Now the public choice in you and me would say, hey, these horrible rules would never
[Guest]: produce the right people, right?
[Guest]: The worst get on top, true.
[Guest]: But once upon a time, we did have genuine statesmen, activists as they were, right?
[Guest]: Krishna here was an extremely activist judge, wrote horrible judgments, created a lot of
[Guest]: problems in labor law and labor jurisprudence that we have until today.
[Guest]: But none of it was self-serving.
[Amit Varma]: I think, you know, in the public choice column that I write for Bloomberg Quint, I think
[Amit Varma]: the first of those examined the question of, in the context of politics, why we had such
[Amit Varma]: outstanding leaders in the post-immediate, post-independence generation, and we don't
[Amit Varma]: today.
[Amit Varma]: And I think the same reason would apply to justices to some extent as well, which is
[Amit Varma]: that it's a residue of a time where the incentives were different for people to get into politics.
[Amit Varma]: If you got into politics or public service in those days, there wasn't so much in it
[Amit Varma]: for you, you were less likely to be driven by the lust for power or money.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, obviously, none of our freedom fighters had access to any of that in any case.
[Amit Varma]: And you were more likely to be animated by higher principles.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd say that it's kind of inevitable that given the shoddy rules that we have, that
[Amit Varma]: we will end up over a period of time with a bunch of scoundrels, both in politics and
[Amit Varma]: in the judiciary.
[Guest]: I completely agree with that, that over a period of time, if you have a bad set of rules
[Guest]: that actually don't check people and don't constrain people, then it creates a situation
[Guest]: where you have, you know, that there will be enough, you know, sort of crazy people
[Guest]: in society or self-serving people in society who will try and manipulate those rules to
[Guest]: their benefit.
[Guest]: And if the bad rules and systems continue over a period of long time, then there is
[Guest]: no question that eventually that group will take over.
[Guest]: And that's exactly what has happened with the judiciary.
[Guest]: You know, we talk about dynastic politics and nepotism, there is no institution with
[Guest]: greater nepotism than the court system in India.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, we have way more number of father-son, you know, Supreme Court justices
[Guest]: pairs than we have, you know, father-son or brother pairs of chief ministers or prime
[Guest]: ministers or something like that.
[Guest]: Now, there is a, one part of it is all of India is dynastic, right, you know, the son
[Guest]: of a potter becomes a potter kind of problem, but there is also a question of nepotism and
[Guest]: connections and, you know, do you know how to navigate the system and hobnob with the
[Guest]: right people such that they nominate you to the bench.
[Guest]: And when the judicial system is completely insular in its appointment systems, this is
[Guest]: just far more likely to happen.
[Guest]: Also, this is the kind of situation where you get a lot of possibilities of sexual harassment
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Now, think about it.
[Guest]: If the Chief Justice of India, now that's not what happened in the current case.
[Guest]: The current case, the complainant is not a judge, okay, but is a staff member.
[Guest]: But you can very easily imagine, right, if enough women make it to the bench, the day
[Guest]: is not far that if all the appointments are controlled by these five men right on top,
[Guest]: that they can abuse their power.
[Guest]: Now, we haven't had that problem yet because there are so few women in the system.
[Guest]: You know, I don't know if that's a benefit or a problem, but so far we haven't had that.
[Guest]: But very soon you're going to see those kinds of problems also.
[Guest]: And I think the biggest problem is when the court system does things like this, it is
[Guest]: legitimacy in the eyes of the public.
[Guest]: Justice must be done, but it must also seem to be done, right?
[Guest]: In some sense, this is all a bit of a magic trick, right?
[Guest]: We all believe that magic is happening and then it's happening.
[Guest]: Now, if we start questioning that this is really not what it seems to be, the whole
[Guest]: institution will come down like a pack of cards because the court doesn't really have
[Guest]: any power of its own aside from public legitimacy.
[Guest]: It doesn't control the purse strings and it doesn't control the sword, right?
[Guest]: So the court system only survives if the people who are vested in the court system think that
[Guest]: it has a right to exist.
[Guest]: So if there are more situations like this, which is basically a problem propagated by
[Guest]: the appointment system, but if there are more situations like Chief Justice Mishra who sat
[Guest]: in his own cause and same as this current Chief Justice Gogoi who sat in a matter in
[Guest]: his own cause, very soon that legitimacy will be lost.
[Guest]: So that's a problem and it can't be fixed overnight.
[Guest]: You can get rid of a bad judge overnight, but this public legitimacy, it just can't
[Amit Varma]: be fixed overnight.
[Amit Varma]: This whole situation of, you know, a judge sitting in a case where he is the accused
[Amit Varma]: feels to me like, you know, the batting side in a cricket match also being the umpire.
[Amit Varma]: So the captain of the batting side will decide whether somebody is out LBW or not.
[Amit Varma]: It's ludicrous.
[Amit Varma]: And I had an episode.
[Guest]: Can I, can I give you, interrupt and give you an example of that?
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: When we were kids playing cricket, the person who owned the bat decided whether that person
[Guest]: was out or not.
[Guest]: I don't know if this was your experience.
[Guest]: But the kid who owned the bat never got out because we all had to wait our turn to bat
[Guest]: because we didn't have one.
[Guest]: So it's a little bit like that also.
[Guest]: You see a lot of that happening in India.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And I had an episode a year back on judicial reforms with my friend Alok Prasanna Kumar.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, he made a very similar point to what you're making now, where he spoke
[Amit Varma]: about how our Supreme Court has a diversity problem.
[Amit Varma]: And in my mind, the ramification of this is not just in terms of representation and so
[Amit Varma]: on in a democracy, but also it impacts decision making, like one of the best books I've read
[Amit Varma]: in the last few years is a book by Philip Tetlock called Super Forecasting, which refers
[Amit Varma]: to a study which showed that the most important parameter for good decision making is diversity.
[Amit Varma]: It's not intelligence, it's not knowledge, it's not or any of those things, but diversity.
[Amit Varma]: And the more diverse that a group is, the more likely you are to make good decisions.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you spoke about the judicial activism of the Delhi High Court earlier,
[Amit Varma]: where they spoke about, you know, all the buses have to go CNG.
[Amit Varma]: And you imagine that if the court was diverse enough that there are people who've actually
[Amit Varma]: grown up riding around in buses and auto rickshaws, maybe they might have had greater foresight
[Amit Varma]: in that situation and not done what they did.
[Amit Varma]: But that aside, so you know, what I see here is a worst of both possible worlds.
[Amit Varma]: On the one hand, the judiciary is not quite independent from the executive because of
[Amit Varma]: bad incentives in play, such as post retirement options, where the government can always hold
[Amit Varma]: out carrots in front of judges and say that, okay, after you retire, this is what you get
[Amit Varma]: and you get that car with the red button on top.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other hand, it is also too powerful in and of itself because it controls the appointment
[Amit Varma]: process through the collegium, the second judge's case of 1993, as you pointed out,
[Amit Varma]: a case of judicial activism, which was actually self-serving.
[Amit Varma]: So this is like a double problem now.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: How do we solve this?
[Guest]: It's very difficult to solve it.
[Guest]: So you know, in, you know, all credit to the Modi government, they tried, okay, they passed
[Guest]: a constitutional amendment, which was called the NJAC, you know, the National Judicial
[Guest]: Collegium.
[Guest]: They amended article 124 to 17, and basically they changed the appointment procedure in
[Guest]: the formal text of the constitution.
[Guest]: So it was a full constitutional amendment, right?
[Guest]: And this constitutional amendment basically said that the collegium will not just have
[Guest]: members of the judiciary.
[Guest]: So the collegium will be the chief justice of India and two justices, but it will also
[Guest]: represent the law minister.
[Guest]: So one position out of six will go to the executive, three positions out of six will
[Guest]: be the judiciary.
[Guest]: That is the CJI and the next two senior most justices.
[Guest]: And it had a provision that there will be two eminent persons who will be on this collegium,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And I think the idea behind this was, look, there is a problem with the executive having
[Guest]: a 50% stake because, you know, the government of India, both the union and the state governments
[Guest]: is the largest litigant before the court, right?
[Guest]: So in that sense, it's a problem to have too much representation.
[Guest]: So they kept it down to one person, right?
[Guest]: And they had this for, you know, two eminent people from society sort of provision.
[Guest]: And there was also provision that there should be enough women and minorities, right?
[Guest]: Within the group that chooses these eminent persons and three from the judiciary.
[Guest]: Now, it is not the best system according to me, but I think it would have still been an
[Guest]: improvement over the current system, right?
[Guest]: Because there was a genuine recognition that the executive needs to participate, but not
[Guest]: participate too much.
[Guest]: And the Supreme Court struck this constitutional amendment down saying it violates the basic
[Guest]: structure and went back to the system of the collegium.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: So you can't actually, so they get to rule on anything which affects them using the excuse
[Guest]: of the basic structure.
[Guest]: Yeah, using the basic structure.
[Guest]: So this is a problem.
[Guest]: And then what happened was, I mean, the executive is also clever.
[Guest]: So the cabinet didn't appoint judges for a long time.
[Guest]: You know, I think this last week we are finally operating at a full strength of the bench,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So the chief justice would send names and the cabinet just won't appoint them.
[Guest]: So what can you do?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So they were in deadlock, which basically meant justice suffered because the bench is
[Guest]: not operating at its full strength, right?
[Guest]: So the cabinet was very clever in that they didn't do anything overt.
[Guest]: But they also knew when to dig their heels.
[Guest]: So now it is a more collaborative process, but there are some other very big problems
[Guest]: with this, right?
[Guest]: Now let's say they wanted to be completely insular.
[Guest]: That is, it was the chief justice of India plus four justices.
[Guest]: It would be so much better still if they made the procedure transparent.
[Guest]: That is, if the collegium sat and they actually took down minutes to the meeting.
[Guest]: In every meeting they told you how many of the members of these five, you know, members
[Guest]: of the collegium support every appointment or oppose every appointment.
[Guest]: None of this exists.
[Guest]: You know, since the second judge's case, and you know, it's confirmation in the third judge's
[Guest]: case, we don't have any minutes to collegium meetings.
[Guest]: They don't exist.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And if they did exist, which institution has the authority to subpoena them?
[Guest]: No one.
[Guest]: So how can we demand to see these minutes?
[Guest]: So the procedures that came about in the third judge's case, which the Supreme Court had
[Guest]: enforced, they are not being followed by the Supreme Court.
[Guest]: So the Supreme Court is sort of running its own like gundaraj kind of thing, right?
[Guest]: It does whatever it wants.
[Guest]: Justice Chellameshwar actually came forward and said that I am in the collegium, but it
[Guest]: is not recording meetings and it's not recording dissent, right?
[Guest]: If you remember last year, there was that famous press conference by the four senior
[Guest]: most judges against Chief Justice Deepak Mishra about the master of the roster and all of
[Guest]: those things.
[Guest]: And one of those issues was also the collegium.
[Guest]: So there is a really big problem in that the courts think that any requirement of disclosure
[Guest]: or scrutiny is a threat to their independence, which is simply not true.
[Guest]: I mean, this is just really, it's sort of like, you know, in the Soviet, the Duma, there
[Guest]: was one of the protections was that there can't be any criminal charges against members
[Guest]: of the Duma.
[Guest]: So guess what happened?
[Guest]: All the criminals ended up in the Duma, right?
[Guest]: So it's one of those sort of things where if you create a system where you are completely
[Guest]: above scrutiny, then only those people who really wish to be above scrutiny are going
[Guest]: to lobby for these spots.
[Guest]: All good decent people are going to sort of stay away from the system because if you're
[Guest]: not a politically motivated judge, you won't survive in this current judicial jungle of
[Guest]: the collegium.
[Guest]: So this is sort of the problem.
[Guest]: There are some other problems also, like the retirement age is frankly too low.
[Guest]: And particularly with reference to the high court.
[Guest]: So you know, the high court retirement age is 62.
[Guest]: So the way it works is mostly Supreme Court justices are promoted up from the high court
[Guest]: and mostly it is when the high court judges retire.
[Guest]: So the average term of a Supreme Court justice is just around two years.
[Guest]: And the average term of a chief justice is about six to eight months.
[Guest]: We've had chief justices who've served three weeks because of the seniority rule.
[Guest]: So there is a lot of churn at the top, you know, so that is one very, very big problem.
[Guest]: That's a diversity problem also, because if most of your judges are coming up from the
[Guest]: high court, then you are getting a very sort of like monochromatic picture of what the
[Guest]: judiciary needs to look like.
[Guest]: Everyone looks the same and has the same kind of experience.
[Guest]: Now, if you read books about the judiciary originally by George Gadboy, you know, who's
[Guest]: done profiles of all the judges, you will notice that even initially both the high court
[Guest]: and the Supreme Court were mostly men, upper caste Brahmin men who had some legal training
[Guest]: and had family, which was like a family of lawyers, right?
[Guest]: So there wasn't too much diversity when we began either, but it seems to have gotten
[Guest]: worse.
[Guest]: There was a little more diversity of thought because they came from different high courts
[Guest]: and different backgrounds personally, but now it's all very elite, upper caste, privileged
[Guest]: people whose family have excellent legal and political connections who are sort of moving
[Guest]: up the bench in the court system.
[Guest]: And there is a really big problem of minority representation in terms of other religions,
[Guest]: women, Dalit community.
[Guest]: It's a really big problem right now, right?
[Guest]: So it's both diversity of individuals in terms of identity and also diversity of ideas.
[Guest]: Like you said, you know, if you've never ridden in a bus, you don't know the problems of shutting
[Guest]: down a bus service.
[Guest]: So it's a little bit of both.
[Guest]: And the Supreme Court is now completely captured by this mess.
[Guest]: And it's not easy in terms of what is the way out of this.
[Guest]: I mean, the new Modi government could have some renewed pressure.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, this new term has got such a loud and large mandate in favor of Narendra
[Guest]: Modi and given the complete mess that has been made by the Supreme Court in the last
[Guest]: year and a half, it is possible that if another constitutional amendment is pushed forth with
[Guest]: a sensible set of appointment rules and procedures, it is possible that the public will support
[Guest]: the government and not the Supreme Court for the first time in a very long time.
[Guest]: So there are some possibilities.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So I should point out to my listeners that we're actually recording this on May 23rd,
[Amit Varma]: which is the date of the election results.
[Amit Varma]: They've just been announced today morning.
[Amit Varma]: We're recording this in the evening, which is why we are not talking about the executive
[Amit Varma]: or the legislature, but about the Supreme Court, silly.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that in all of this, there is a sort of this fundamental trade off that
[Amit Varma]: has to be made between on the one hand, the independence of the judiciary, which is important,
[Amit Varma]: but on the other hand, between the accountability of the judiciary, which also matters a great
[Amit Varma]: deal.
[Guest]: Now, I want to ask you.
[Guest]: And thirdly, the competence, frankly, I mean, I mean, if you read the more recent judgments
[Guest]: and opinions, they are just a horror.
[Guest]: I mean, and when I say a horror, I'm not being a snob like, oh, you know, it's grammatically
[Guest]: incorrect or not formatted.
[Guest]: I really mean, in terms of points of fact and points of law, these judges seem to have
[Guest]: just come out of nowhere, and they seem to just write whatever flies into their mind.
[Guest]: And there is no sensible reasoning.
[Guest]: Reason has left the Supreme Court building completely.
[Guest]: So that is, I think, the greatest loss in all of this.
[Guest]: We are having a huge body of law, but that law has no reason in it.
[Guest]: So it is not very useful in terms of being binding as, you know, precedent in the future,
[Guest]: because we don't have any sensible, like, doctrinal analysis on why is it that the courts
[Guest]: have come to this opinion or, you know, landed on one side or the other side in this particular
[Guest]: case.
[Guest]: So it's, what is being lost is more than just, oh, I don't like this Supreme Court judge
[Guest]: and there's a sexual harassment against that Supreme Court justice.
[Guest]: That's really not the only thing at stake.
[Guest]: There is a huge missed opportunity on what is a sensible body of law and rules.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of quick questions before we wind it up.
[Amit Varma]: Number one, from within the judiciary, there have been voices of dissent and change, including
[Amit Varma]: from the Supreme Court itself.
[Amit Varma]: What is driving those voices and how likely are they to succeed?
[Amit Varma]: And number two, you spoke about the NJAC constitutional amendment that the last Modi government tried
[Amit Varma]: and you pointed out about how it would be a good measure.
[Amit Varma]: What was driving the attempt by the government to sort of get that amendment through?
[Amit Varma]: What are their incentives?
[Guest]: So, you know, I would say, you know, despite my other reservations with a lot of Modi government's
[Guest]: policies on the NJAC matter, they were fairly restrained.
[Guest]: You know, I must give credit where credit is due.
[Guest]: And this is obviously in comparison to the horrors of Indira Gandhi and the emergency,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So they could have done a lot worse given the kind of popularity and mandate they had,
[Guest]: but they were fairly restrained.
[Guest]: They tried to do it properly.
[Guest]: They tried to do it through a proper constitutional amendment procedure and the amendment had
[Guest]: a lot of problems, but it wasn't the worst thing that had been suggested and it was probably
[Guest]: an improvement over the past.
[Guest]: So that is the first thing I want to say about that.
[Guest]: The second is, I think the revolution has to come from within if it has to have legitimacy.
[Guest]: So you know, I wrote a column a few months ago saying the Supreme Court needs to have
[Guest]: a Ulysses fact.
[Guest]: So you know the story of Ulysses and the sirens?
[Amit Varma]: You remind my listeners, which is one way of saying, I know, but remind my listeners.
[Guest]: So Ulysses or, you know, the Odyssey, so him, when he returns from the wars and travels
[Guest]: and he's on the ship with all his men, he realizes that he is going to get distracted
[Guest]: by the sound or the music of the sirens, right?
[Guest]: And what Ulysses does is quite interesting.
[Guest]: He pours wax into the ears of all his men so that they are not distracted by the sound
[Guest]: of the sirens.
[Guest]: And then he ties himself to the mast of the ship and tells his men not to untie him, right?
[Guest]: So this is basically like the legend or the mythical version.
[Guest]: The idea is that you must tie your own hands because you know that your future self, when
[Guest]: faced with the terrible incentives, will not be able to do the right thing.
[Guest]: But your current self already knows that, so you must take precautions for it, right?
[Guest]: So if Ulysses has no one else to monitor and govern him the way he could monitor his men
[Guest]: and pour wax in his ears, then it is upon Ulysses to tie himself to the mast.
[Guest]: That's sort of the idea.
[Guest]: So this legend or folklore was, you know, invoked by John Elster when he spoke about
[Guest]: constitutional constraints.
[Guest]: So that's where this comes from.
[Guest]: So I had written a column that said that the Indian Supreme Court needs its own Ulysses
[Guest]: Pact, which is they need to come up with a system of internal rules and protocols on
[Guest]: appointment, on retirement age, and they need to stick by it, right?
[Guest]: Now these are experts in lawmaking, right?
[Guest]: So they need to create a culture where they come up with a very clear set of rules on
[Guest]: appointment and they have disclosure requirements, right?
[Guest]: So that's one way.
[Guest]: Another is they need to have protocols for recusal, which is if you are adjudicating
[Guest]: your own case or it's come before your bench, when must you recuse yourself and when can
[Guest]: you continue, right?
[Guest]: That's another kind of situation that needs protocols.
[Guest]: Then a third situation that needs protocols is, should there be some kind of like moratorium
[Guest]: or a gap before you're allowed to take other paid work or, you know, work for the government
[Guest]: of India?
[Guest]: You know, you also don't want them working for Adani immediately after they sat on a
[Guest]: bench which has a judgment affecting the Adani companies or something like that.
[Guest]: So we need to have rules and protocols for all this.
[Guest]: And there are two parts to the rules and protocols.
[Guest]: One is they need to be put down.
[Guest]: And the second is we do need some leadership within the judiciary to actually enforce this
[Guest]: over a period of a few years such that they become conventions, right?
[Guest]: Because it's very difficult.
[Guest]: I mean, we've tried the bazooka, which is the constitutional amendment, and it has failed.
[Guest]: And the public was with the judiciary at that time.
[Guest]: So the judiciary needs to save itself because if they won't let any sunlight from outside,
[Guest]: they need to come up with a set of rules.
[Guest]: So that is, I think the number one thing that is required.
[Guest]: The second possibility is we burn the whole thing down and build it up from scratch, which
[Guest]: could be done with a strong leader like Narendra Modi, frankly.
[Guest]: You know, he has such huge public support and mandate that if he said that the Supreme
[Guest]: Court is extremely corrupt, which it is, and there's too much nepotism and dynastic whatever
[Guest]: in the Supreme Court, and we need to create a new system by which judges are appointed
[Guest]: and promoted, it is wholly possible that he might get away with it, right?
[Guest]: So once again, Narendra Modi will also need a Ulysses pact, like he should not go too
[Guest]: crazy with the power and the mandate that he has.
[Amit Varma]: I'm already, I'm already shivering in terror, thinking of Mr. Modi changing the constitution
[Amit Varma]: and putting a new Supreme Court in place and all of that.
[Guest]: And yeah, well, it won't be a new Supreme Court in place, but it would be a new set
[Guest]: of procedures to appoint, which frankly needs to come at some point.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, it's a little hard and, you know, in all fairness, he's one fair and
[Guest]: square with a huge vote share, with a huge majority, a larger majority than before, despite
[Guest]: all his policy failures and successes.
[Guest]: So if you truly believe in the constitution and democratic decision making, it is very
[Guest]: complicated to say that I don't like this guy and therefore he shouldn't get involved
[Guest]: in a constitutional amendment or something like that.
[Guest]: The only person who has the power to dictate a constitutional amendment is the prime minister
[Guest]: with the support of parliament, obviously, you know, but it needs to come from the majority
[Amit Varma]: in parliament.
[Amit Varma]: No, I agree with that.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, all our prime ministers, Nehru onwards, as you've pointed out repeatedly
[Amit Varma]: have changed the constitution many, many times, and this man has a majority bigger than most
[Amit Varma]: others.
[Amit Varma]: But then I would simply worry about the incentives in play if the executive is to try and redesign
[Amit Varma]: the judicial system, because obviously they would try to redesign it in such a way that
[Amit Varma]: the institution loses its independence.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, they might be, you know, Mr. Modi might be an enlightened statesman and might
[Amit Varma]: not do that.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm just looking at the incentives and saying, those are the incentives.
[Guest]: Yeah, but on the other hand, the incentives are pretty bad for the judiciary also to reform
[Guest]: itself.
[Guest]: You know, so we're kind of stuck between a rock and a hard place sort of, you know, it's
[Guest]: really difficult.
[Guest]: And, you know, these are the sorts of areas where a great leader can really break through,
[Guest]: you know, there's an incentive problem on both sides, there's an incentive problem on
[Guest]: all sides, and it does take a great leader to rise above the incentive problem.
[Guest]: So, you know, it's possible that it could come from like the next chief justice of India
[Guest]: or the one after, but it's also possible that it comes from Narendra Modi who wants to make
[Amit Varma]: a place for himself in history, you know.
[Amit Varma]: That's fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: And the chief justices change fairly fast, right?
[Unknown]: So it's as they change very quickly, there is a chance that there'll be some guy who'll
[Amit Varma]: say, hey, let me, let me seal my legacy by doing this thing, which I know is kind of
[Guest]: required.
[Guest]: But the trouble, you know, we kind of need someone who's around for three, four years.
[Guest]: I'll tell you why we need someone to put the rules in place and enforce them and create
[Guest]: a culture over 50-60 judges journey.
[Guest]: You know, that's when it really takes.
[Guest]: So I think Justice Chandrachud is the next one in line, not immediately, but is the next
[Guest]: one who will have a fairly long term.
[Guest]: So my hope is that maybe, you know, his term is long enough.
[Guest]: You know, this is your classic residual clemency problem, right?
[Guest]: So initially when we used to talk about courts, we used to say the Kanya court, the Shastri
[Guest]: court, right, the Bhagwati court.
[Guest]: So the chief justice who was leading the court was sort of responsible for what happened
[Guest]: during that time in terms of its jurisprudence and procedure.
[Guest]: So we have no one to take ownership of the court because the churn is just so high.
[Guest]: So I think one way of thinking about the incentive problem is like you said, you know, someone
[Guest]: just like Justice Sikri on his last day of retirement just gives you the crazy nuclear
[Guest]: judgment of Keshavanand Bharti and flies off into the sunset, right?
[Guest]: The other possibility is someone says, I'm here for five years, my reputation depends
[Guest]: on it, and I have a chance to really reform and put down some rules and actually enforce
[Guest]: the rules and turn them into convention.
[Guest]: So I think both are possible.
[Guest]: The question is, what will happen and who will do it?
[Amit Varma]: If Justice Chandrachud is listening to this episode, kindly do something about us.
[Amit Varma]: Get us out of the spot.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti, it's been great talking to you today as usual.
[Amit Varma]: I learned a lot.
[Guest]: Thanks for your time.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: It's always a pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, you can follow Shruti on Twitter at S Raj
[Amit Varma]: Gopalan.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, that's A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and the Unseen at seenunseen.in and thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution, an independent center
[Amit Varma]: for research and education in public policy.
[Amit Varma]: Takshashila Institution offers 12-week courses in public policy, technology policy and strategic
[Amit Varma]: studies for both full-time students and working professionals.
[Amit Varma]: Visit takshashila.org.in for more details.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: I'm Amit and I'll see you in the next episode of The Seen and the Unseen.
[Unknown]: I'm Anirudh Kanesetty and I'm a History and Geopolitics researcher.
[Unknown]: And I host Echoes of India.
[Unknown]: A history podcast about India, by Indians and for Indians.
[Unknown]: In Echoes, we journey through the complex histories of South Asia and what they can
[Unknown]: teach us about our globalised world.
[Unknown]: Tune in every Wednesday on ivmpodcast.com or your favorite podcast app.